We prove that for every nowhere dense class of graphs $\CCC$, as
defined by Ne\v set\v ril and Ossona de
Mendez~\cite{nevsetvril2010first,nevsetvril2011nowhere}, and for every
first order formula $\phi(\tup x,\tup y)$, whenever one draws a graph
$G\in \CCC$ and a subset of its vertices $A$, the number of subsets of
$A^{|\tup y|}$ that are of the form $\set{\tup v\in A^{|\tup y|}\,
\colon\, G\models\phi(\bar u,\tup v)}$ for some valuation~$\tup u$ of
$\tup x$ in $G$ is bounded by $\Oof(|A|^{|\tup x|+\epsilon})$, for
every $\epsilon>0$. This provides optimal bounds on the VC-density of
first-order definable set systems in nowhere dense graph classes.
%
We also give two new proofs of upper bounds on quantities in nowhere
dense classes that are relevant for their logical treatment. First, we
provide a new proof of the fact that nowhere dense classes are
uniformly quasi-wide, implying explicit, polynomial upper bounds on
the functions relating the two notions. Second, we give a new
combinatorial proof of the result of Adler and
Adler~\cite{adler2014interpreting} stating that every nowhere dense
class of graphs is stable. In contrast to the previous proofs of the
above results, our proofs are completely finitistic and constructive,
and yield explicit and computable upper bounds on quantities related
to uniform quasi-wideness (margins) and stability (ladder indices).